That's what our signals signals.
Okay, let me see if I can explain this because
I don't think there's an official definition.
I think there's a lot of interpretations of what signals can be.
But it's actually pretty simple in some ways.
A signal is just a thing that you can observe and get notified when it changes.
So it's not any different from, you know, like looking at a traffic signal.
Like you can look at it, it's going to flip and then you know that something has changed.
And that sounds kind of simple and like, why would that be useful?
But it has become the foundation for a lot of the innovation happening in the front end world.
And that's why I think it's been coming up a lot more.
Okay, so SolidJS is sort of the, they're probably not even the pioneer of signals.
I guess Ryan would probably say it was something before that, which was the thing before that.
What is the, like, today signals matter and people are talking about them a lot
because SolidJS sort of is gaining in popularity, I guess, and React doesn't use signals.
Is that a good framing?
Yeah, exactly.
And I think there's a lot of frameworks adding signals or having signal like concepts in them.
I think for this discussion, it's probably easiest to scope it just to solid.
Mostly because I think for this wave of signals and like thinking about reactivity,
that is solid wasn't one to kick it off.
And I also personally think that they have the best, maybe implementations are wrong word,
but signals are just one piece of what you need.
And I think the way everything comes together in Solid and exposes signals to you.
I think for me, I think it's the best implementation so far.
So yeah, if you're looking to get into it and understand what's going on,
I think it's good to look at the way it's used in Solid.
So could you sort of juxtapose just talk about the trade-offs?
So React does something different.
It has a virtual DOM and it's like the UIs, a function of state.
And that's different from the way Solid works and the way signals work.
Could you kind of just like lay that out for me so that my dumb brain will understand the difference?
Yeah, so I'll give you the shot.
So I think first, we need to think about how React works.
And I think a lot of us are obviously super familiar with this,
because most of us have been doing React for years and years and years.
And we kind of take a lot of how it works for granted.
But it's good to lay it out to understand how it compares to Solid.
So in React, you have the concept of components.
And I think that's why a lot of us use React.
We like breaking our application up into components.
And the way you define a component React is you define a function.
And the job of this function is to say,
given some input properties, what should the UI look like?
So the function is a, it's not right to think of this as like,
oh, this is the way to do components with functions.
It's really the way React does components with functions.
They make you define it as like any time we need to know what this should look like,
we're going to call this function and your jobs spit out the,
like the JSX tree that it should display.
Then React is a hard work of saying, okay,
given you're saying the UI should look like this,
let's look at what the UI already looks like on the screen
and figure out what's actually changed and will diff it and will patch the UI.
So it matches.
And anytime there's any kind of change in your application in your system,
it retriggers all the render functions across your whole app,
figures out what the UI should look like and then repeats this,
this patching process.
And this works incredibly well.
It seems like it would be slow.
It seems like a waste of computation,
but it does work really well.
And it was kind of a huge like burden.
The ease of burden when React first came out,
it was way easier to reason about then the way we're doing things before,
where we had to think explicitly about, okay, this thing happened,
like let me go find the element in the UI and go change it manually.
So that was a big innovation and it made a lot of sense.
I think as React changed over time,
and honestly, as UIs changed over time,
there's a, we're doing a lot more complex crazy stuff on the web now.
There's been some challenges with this model.
It still is pretty performant, but there are cases,
especially considering rendering a large table or doing anything with a lot of elements on screen.
These render functions start to get kind of expensive.
And there's a question of, one, can this be more performant?
And two, there are a lot of cases in React that are tricky and hard to reason about,
especially when the hook stuff came out.
Like use memo and passing dependency arrays,
like forgetting to pass that in.
Use effect was a thing that came out that we were all using,
and then eventually we realized, oh, we should actually never be using this.
So there's been a lot of history with React.
And as great and successful as it's been,
I think a lot of us, when we're using React,
despite us having years and years of experience with it,
it's been kind of like, why do I still not feel good at React?
I still feel like I'm struggling.
That's what got me excited of looking at something at an alternative.
And I found SolidJS about maybe two years ago now,
and it looked a lot like React, but the model is completely different.
So I just talked a lot, but does that make sense in terms of React works?
It does, but that last thing you said, the model is completely different.
When I look at Solid stuff, and I'm just very new to it,
but it doesn't look that different.
I mean, I know it's JSX, but even like the difference is like,
you have to call the function of your thing instead of just like placing it in the brackets.
That it all seems very similar.
Is it mostly just the underlying way it works is so different,
but it feels very much like writing React or not?
Yeah, I think that what you're describing is accurate,
and it's a pro and a con of Solid.
So a pro is when you're moving to Solid, you immediately are like,
"Oh, I know how all this works.
I can build you eyes."
And you will, like you start to use Solid in your first day.
You'll be shipping a lot, because it looks a lot like React.
But it's kind of deceptively the same.
It's same in JSX and it's all familiar.
I personally went through a phase where I was like,
I basically built a pretty complex app over the course of a month.
And then I was looking at stuff, and I was like, wait a minute.
I actually don't understand anything that's going on.
And I just kind of recreated all this complexity for no reason,
because I was just bringing React patterns over.
That sounds like every time I build anything with any technology.
Yeah, exactly.
So I think it took me like a month or two to kind of untrain
my React brain to really think in terms of Solid.
And there is a little bit of that learning curve.
And it's deceptive because you don't expect it.
Usually when you find something that has a learning curve,
you just are completely unproductive.
So you know, you don't know anything.
But with Solid, you kind of think you know something.
And then later you realize, oh, no, this is how it actually should be.
So let me get into the, you're right, it looks similar.
So let's talk about what actually is different.
So I said earlier that in React, component function is a render function.
Like the job of this function is to compute the HTML that comes out of it.
And Solid, it looks very similar because a component function,
again, it receives props, it returns some JSX, but it's not a render function.
It's a setup function.
So the way to think about it is when a component first shows up on screen,
your Solid JS component function is called once.
And it's a job.
It's a return a template.
And it's never run again.
So everything in the body of your Solid JS function only ever runs once.
So there's certain things that you do in React that make a lot of sense.
Like you can do a conditional and return no.
And if that condition changes, it's fine, right?
Because it's the function to run again.
And then the next time it's going to have an actual thing.
That actually makes no sense in Solid because your component only
ever runs once.
A return, it's going to set up the component.
And from then on, it disappears.
And even at runtime, the constant of a component doesn't really exist in Solid.
When it's running, Solid doesn't see your HTML with a bunch of different components.
It just sees it as one giant HTML document.
And so this is fundamentally very different, right?
And the way this works is when you return the template, Solid looks at the template and sees,
it kind of creates holes in the template.
It says, OK, like this part of the template, let's say your template is like you return a div.
It says, hello, my name is-- and then the name is referencing some signal, right?
It punches a hole in the template saying, OK, here's the static parts of the template.
Here's a part that changes.
Let me observe the part that is changing.
So it's basically a description of my name.
And then whenever that changes, it'll then surgically go into your DOM
and then replace that hole with the new value.
While the rest of it remains static.
And the benefits of this is one performance, right?
There's no diffing process.
It basically-- like your app renders once.
And it basically keeps track of the parts of your app that are static, the parts that are dynamic.
And whenever something of the dynamic parts change,
it can just go and knows exactly where the DOM could go, make that update.
Does that make sense?
So you have to use-- yeah, it does.
So you have to use signals for any part of your UI, the actual template that changes over time.
If it's going to change, you can't just do--
what you described was very much stuff I do in React, where you just like--
you just count on the fact this is going to run every time anything changes.
And you can compute like kind of like derived properties from other pieces of state.
Yep.
Can't do that in solid.
You do everything you need to change in the UI.
It needs to be sort of driven by a signal.
Yeah.
Is that--
And ultimately, the primitives are actually very similar.
So a signal is effectively a piece of state.
And you can change that state over time.
It can be a number.
Similar to use state.
Exactly, similar to use state.
Just like that.
Okay.
Then the next level is derived state.
So let's say you have a signal that's count.
And then you have something that's like double count.
So this is count times two.
So that second piece of-- it is kind of-- it is state, but it's derived from another piece of state.
And then you have effects, which are, okay, when something changes,
I want to run this logic.
And effect is kind of like observing a signal.
Those are the three primitives.
It's honestly very similar to a React where you have use state.
You have use memo.
The thing that's different in solid is you don't have this dependency array concept.
So in React, when you say use memo, you have to pass in.
Okay.
Here are the things that we're going to watch.
If any of these things change, then rerun the memo.
In solid, there's something called auto tracking.
So you don't ever pass in a dependency array.
It knows what signals you're referencing in your little callback.
And it knows that whenever any of those signals change,
it needs to rerun the callback.
So it's kind of-- that's really nice because you're not like debugging.
Oh, why is this-- why isn't this memo rerunning?
Oh, I forgot to pass in something with dependency array.
And it's one of the nice things about solid.
The downsides of it are you might-- it's maybe a little un-- it's a little less explicit, right?
Whenever you have auto tracking, it's a little less explicit,
which means you might run to situations where you accidentally like track something.
You might create a dependency you didn't mean to.
But these are my-- this is kind of like blowing up on Twitter as like,
this is a huge deal.
I think in practice, it's one of those things where you like mess up.
And like three seconds later, you realize you messed up and you just fix it.
And over time, you get better at this and it feels entirely normal.
Yeah, I wanted to talk about that too, just kind of the discourse right now.
Like Dan from the React team has been calling out like,
here are the real trade-offs and sort of framing React as making the right choices.
Could you maybe better explain like from a practical standpoint,
could you build real stuff with these things?
Could you explain like, what are the real trade-offs you're making
if you choose solid over React?
Yeah, so I'm going to give my unfiltered opinion right now, so get ready.
Yeah, please do.
The juicy stuff.
The thing that's a little bit frustrating for me with what's happening on Twitter
is I think the conversation has kind of evolved into like not really a great place.
I actually think all this is good for solid and I'll explain why.
What you're starting to see is people are posting examples from solid
that make it look silly or confusing.
And we know given any framework, there's always examples like this, right?
Like, I can go make funny examples in React of being like,
look, this creates an infinite loop or like, look, like this, you know,
isn't this like you can't call a hook in an if statement.
You can make anything look kind of dumb just in without context.
And not a lot of people have like experienced building real applications with solid.
So it's hard for people to tell when they look at this snippet of like,
a snippet that looks obviously dumb, by the way, a snippet that was being shared on Twitter,
the linter, there are some linting rules you can turn on and solve.
It would have actually caught that.
Similar to in React, there's something rules like catch like the rule of hooks thing.
But you know, people don't have that context.
So when they look at it, they're like, oh, this looks really bad or like,
this looked really intuitive, it was just confusing.
But in practice, you know, having built, like I have a,
I mentioned this on Twitter, like I have a production and solid application.
That's probably the most complex application I've ever built that I've been building for
over a year now.
So me looking at that snippet, I'm like, yeah, that's kind of,
you kind of posted broken code that doesn't really make sense.
And yeah, technically it doesn't work.
But in practice, this never really bothers you that much.
Just like with any framework language or some things you kind of have to learn
initially and you learn it and you never think about it again.
So I definitely fell in that category.
But it started to blow up more where, you know, people from the React team were quoting it,
being like, this is the exact problem with signals.
This is why the React team never went down this route.
And they were a little defensive.
I think, I think what Dan said was, I think they're getting a lot of people saying to them,
like, oh, you guys are dumb.
You never even thought of signals, which definitely isn't true.
Like they, like they spent a lot of time thinking about this.
I'm sure they thought about this model.
And for whatever reason, they chose not to go to it.
So they're defensive saying like, yeah, we did think about it.
This is why it sucks.
This is why we didn't use it.
And here's a trade off we made and why React is better.
So one, that's great for solid because now it's,
they have never put solid at the same level as React before.
It's always been like, oh, solid, like cute little project that, you know, Ryan works on.
But now they're saying like, oh, they are like the diametric opposite of what we,
what we, you know, what, what they're claiming they did, which puts them at the same level.
Simultaneously, it's kind of a bad move on their part because I don't really think,
I know they're saying this.
I don't know if I fully buy the React team story that this was a very explicit decision
because these are two trade offs they saw because it's not entirely accurate.
Because it's based on this idea of like there's some fundamental trade off and saw that's not really there.
So if people do buy into the story of these are two equal trade offs and they start to
explore the trade offs, they're going to find that, oh, it's going to look like the solid trade off
was always the right choice because there's not really that gotcha is not like a real gotcha.
Yeah. So it's interesting.
I don't know why they've ramped up.
They ramped up in this way and might not be super intentional.
Might just be because a lot more people are annoying them about this.
But to me, it's like, this is, this is really great for the solid community.
It is the bundle size. I know you don't really care about this because it's like,
oh, users are, well, maybe you do care about it.
But like users are using apps like this, these single page applications for long sessions.
It doesn't matter if, but like, it doesn't matter because to me,
the 200 kilobytes or whatever of Uncle Brush JavaScript that React is just sort of like speaks
to how old and large it is in my mind.
And it just feels like if, if, if solid can give me even 90% of what I enjoy from productivity
with React and it does it with five kilobytes of JavaScript or whatever it is,
like, it just feels like that feels better.
Yeah, exactly. So there's that and there's kind of what the bundle size represents.
My feeling when using, like I said, I remember when I was first using solid
and what I created was really over complicated.
And then when I fixed all that, I'm like, wow, what was all this stuff I've been doing?
Like web development is so easy.
So that like the extra bundle size also kind of maps to more complexity that's in our brains.
With solid, I kind of feel like I'm using, I kind of feel like I'm back to using jQuery plus like,
like a nicer component framework on top.
I'm back to using stuff like, you know, query selector.
I'm back to like grabbing elements and like mutating them.
I'm not in this like, ref nightmare that you have with React.
Like anytime you need to touch a DOM element, it's like the worst thing ever is you avoid doing it.
So there's just so much for you want to use a library that needs to interact with the DOM.
Like you got to find react versions of everything, which granted it to huge ecosystem.
There are react versions of most everything.
But there's just like a mismatch with the way the browser operates and the way react operates.
So you're always like in the caught in the middle of that where what's all that all really feels
like it disappears. It barely feels like a web framework. It more just feels like here,
a bunch of useful reactive primitives, then kind of you can kind of just go use
like the normal web stuff that that has gotten a lot better since like when React first came out.
So can we talk like big picture zoom out? Like everyone on Twitter is sort of like
at a fever pitch these days around new things coming out. And that's always been the case.
And a lot of people will say, well, the people didn't say and like react was,
we're going to see the end of react for years. It never happens.
Do you think things are fundamentally changing in favor of the field versus react?
I know it's not a competition, but it kind of is. I mean, like people are choosing new things
for Greenfield projects. And the mind share has been largely in favor of react for a long time.
Do you think that's changing at all? I think what people need to remember is there's like
the absolute truth and there's a truth within a bubble. And they both actually matter.
The absolute truth is most websites are on WordPress, right? Like that's a fundamental stat.
Yeah, like you said this morning, a bunch of them are squeezing jQuery.
And forever till the end of our lifetimes, there's going to be a ton of react websites.
And this is all fundamentally true. So of course, you can always, people can always say like,
oh, it's dumb to say it's an react because like, you know, the clistats. But then there's stuff,
if you scope that down to a bubble, stuff starts to look a little bit different, right?
The best engineers that are out there, the ones that are the most into what they're doing,
what are they getting excited about when they look for their next job? Like, what are they
going to be excited about? When a company is starting a new application and they have the
opportunity to, like you said, greenfield opportunity to like start fresh, what are they
going to be excited about? Where are all the opportunities for actively maintain apps versus
apps that are like kind of on life support being phased out? I think that's why,
yeah, there's always new stuff coming out as well as all the energy around it. And I think
people are frustrated because they're like, Oh, this stuff is so small, but it kind of represents
like a majority of the future. So for me, I am never going to be starting a new react app again,
except for that react native app, we just started
because, you know, react native is still still dominant, at least for now. Yeah, but I'm never
going to be starting one again. I don't think I'm really going to be willing to work anywhere that
is using it. So yeah, for me, it's like, it's dead for me. And I think for a lot of people that are,
yeah, sorry, new stuff for like, kind of really excited about this stuff. Like,
they're going to see it as a benefit to be able to work somewhere that, you know, is using some of
these new patterns. Yeah, and I mean, these people, it does matter to the react maintainers, I'm sure,
that like, the topic on Twitter might not always be react. Like, even if it's still a small bubble
of like, power users, the discourse does seem to be shifting away. And it, it from the outside,
I don't know these people, but it does seem like it's bothering them. So a little bit.
Yeah, I wish I could just remind them that they were insanely successful way beyond anything
else by comparison. Like one, there's, I was saying the other day, there's a whole documentary
on reaction framework has ever gotten a documentary. That's, that's incredible. They've been around
for so long. They've gone through and they've, I think they've kind of can't. So for me, if, if,
if a product can cannibalize itself, like that's really impressive. React used to look a lot
different, class components, like, and now it looks completely different. They basically launched
two successful frameworks, been around for, you know, 10 or so years. So that's, that's really
impressive. Anything in tech lasting 10 years, you know, I work on SST. I would be shocked if we
last 10 years. So yeah, it's, it's impressive. But you know, nothing can really last forever.
Yeah. So it's, it's not the end of react. React will be here forever. But it is,
it's kind of the beginning of the end for react, at least in a bubble.
Yeah, I think so. But it's funny because that stupid cliche quote, the one that's like,
the reason I hate it is because there's that really cringy video of Elizabeth Holmes saying it.
So I think she like killed the quote, but it's the, the whole like first they ignore you,
then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then they, then you win thing. I feel like,
yeah, the solid just entered the, they fight you phase. Because, because like they were kind of,
like, I mean, Ryan's been working on Solve for five years. Most of Solve history, he's been
ignored. Yeah. Then it was kind of like, oh, like, you know, that's like a, you know, a cute little
thing. And then now it's not the same level. So you can see where this is heading. Cool.
Well, I'm, I'm definitely excited about I'm, I thought I was going to use it. I guess one other
question kind of getting in the weeds, this is not a thing to wrap up the podcast with. But, uh,
from like a progressive enhancement standpoint, if you're building like mostly a site, I know sites
versus apps is like a dumb generalization. There's a lot of nuance. But if you're building something
that's mostly a site, but you have little bits of interactivity, just solid and other sort of
spa first, like frameworks make sense to like progressively enhance your site. Or they more like,
it needs to be a spa. I feel like Astro had just made this question really simple. I'm using it
exactly. It's just like, just use Astro when you don't feel like you're going to build in a single
page application. And then then the interactive bits are just like whatever framework you like.
So yeah, I've done it. So it's just the island. Yeah, exactly. So I've done a few things in Astro
and I've always used it with it because that's one that I like. But it kind of doesn't matter at
that point. It like kind of solves all those problems for you. Okay, that was a terrible question.
We'd wrap this up. You had like gotten into philosophy with like an Elizabeth Holmes quote
and all this. And then, and then I asked that question. Okay, I'll bring it back down to Earth
always. Got to bring a breakdown. Yeah, this has been fun. It's fun doing this podcast again.
I enjoy it quite a lot. All right. All right. See you, Dax. See ya.